Specification for UVIC Design Engineering Materials Database

This document will serve as the specification for the development of the UVIC Design Engineering Materials Database

End goal:
There is a material database that is used by undergraduate and graduate students to reference material properties.  The database will be limited to common materials 
used in the mechanical engineering design process. This is a key aspect of this database - it features materials that are likely to be used regularly in the design process by students, and doesn't list materials that are not readily available or could be easily substitued by readily available materials.  Less common materials can be entered but they are flagged.  By refering to this database, students will gain insight into the most common engineering materials that they should use in their designs unless there is a very specific reason to change.

There is also the option for students to propose entries to the database. These entries will be saved, but will not be available to others until vetted by a site administrator. One of the key goals of the database is to encourage students to research materials and enter their findings into the database.

It is expected that the database will change over time, so it is important that previous entries can be upgraded to the new format.

For implementation, the repository of material json files and code will be stored on GitHub, and there will be a website hosted on GitHub that serves engineering materials data to students.  There are options to display numerical and graphical material 
properties of single or multiple picked materials.  Some examples would be a list of Material Properties, or a graphical comparison of specific strengths of materials. 
There is a search feature that allows filtering of materials based on entered characteristics.

New entries are made though an html form. The entries can be saved as .json files.  Also .json files can be uploaded to fully or partially populate the entry form.

Interface / Database Structure

Beside each entry there should be a drop down box to select a reference.

Systems Units:
    The system has options to convert units for entries and outputs. Where multiple options exist there is a pull-down box to allow entry in different units, and display
    screens have a feature to pick display units.  
        Pressure: (GPa, MPa, psi, ksi)
        Strain: (%)
        Hardness: (Vickers, Brinell, Rockwell)
        Fatigue: (Cycles)
        Fracture Toughness: (MPa*m^.5, ksi*in^.5)

Input Group: Material Identification
    Field: Material Name; Enter: String
    Field: Category; Single Pick:One of Metal, Plastic, Ceramic, Composite
    Field: Suitable Fabrication Processes; Multiple Pick: Machining, Welding, Forging, Casting, Extrude, Injection Mould, 3D Printable (FDM), 3D Print (SLA), 3D Print (SLS), Vacuum Infusion, Composite Layup, Plateable, Polishable
    Field: Common Forms: Multiple Pick: Sheet, Plate, Round Bar, Angles and Structural Profiles, Filament
    Field: Common Form Notes: Enter: Text Box
    Field: Notes; Enter: Text Box

Input Group: Typical Usage
    Field: Typical Usage: Enter: Text Box

Input Group: Material Mechanical Properties
    Common Properties
    Field: Young's Modulus; Enter: Float; Enter: Float; Pick: Pressure Units
    Field: Poisson's Ratio; Enter: Float
    Field: Yield Strength (elastic limit); Enter: Float; Pick: Pressure Units
    Field: Tensile Strength; Enter: Float; Pick: Pressure units
    Field: Compressive Modulus: Enter: Float; Enter: Float; Pick: Pressure units
    Field: Usable Temperature Range: Float; 

    Other Properties
    Field: Microyield Strength; Enter: Float; Pick: Pressure Units
    Field: Creep strength; Enter: Float; Pick: Pressure Units
    Field: Fatigue Strength: Enter: Enter Float; Pick: Fatigue Units
    Field: Fracture toughness: Enter: Enter Float; Pick: Fracture Toughness Units
    Field: Hardness: Enter: Enter Float; Pick: Hardness Units
    Field: Ductility (Percent Elongation): Enter: Float (Minimum, Maximum, Typical). If only minimum and maximum are entered then typical is calculated as the average

Input Group: Physical / Thermal Properties
    Field: Density
    Field: Electrical Conductivity
    Field: Vapour Pressure
    Field: Thermal Expansion  (allow for single entry or for table of CTE at various temperatures)
    Field: Thermal Conductivity
    Field: Specific Heat
    Field: Thermal diffusivity
    Field: Melting Point

Output Group: Calculated Material Properties
    Field: Specific Stiffness
    Field: Shear Modulus

Input Group: New References
    Field: Reference (accepts Bibtex)


Reports:
    Ability to plot any parameter across a set of selected materials 
    Ability to plot CTE versus temperatre for materials that have CTE tables. This should include a curve fit between data points


References: 

There should be a database of references. References can be entered when new materials are created, but the input form should also have all references from the database available to pick.  References should be able to be entered as an uploaded bibtex file, or by entering partial Bibtex fields on an input screen. 


References for this document:


[Ref 1]
@inproceedings{10.1117/12.279804,
author = {Roger A. Paquin},
title = {{Advanced materials: an overview}},
volume = {10289},
booktitle = {Advanced Materials for Optics and Precision Structures: A Critical Review},
editor = {Mark A. Ealey and Roger A. Paquin and Thomas B. Parsonage},
organization = {International Society for Optics and Photonics},
publisher = {SPIE},
pages = {1028902},
year = {1997},
doi = {10.1117/12.279804},
URL = {https://doi.org/10.1117/12.279804}
}












